The answer to your question is both yes and no. And
the first thing is the ambassadors did not attend
the bond group. This is a technical matter, but in
answer to your question.
The people who actually attended the bond group
were people at the level of a political counselor.
And
it's very difficult to be precise because when you
go to meetings over a long period of time, there are
sort of ebbs and flows of events. Some days there's
one approach and another day another approach or
even on specific items. the attitude of the
various governments
might change. Whether the French were becoming
more friendly with the Russians than the British,
it's kind of hard to say. I wouldn't try to answer it
that way. In the preparation, in actual work,
things are not all that clear. And even for the
governments, more a case of
broad policies or broad efforts, you'll decide
that it's time to try to negotiate. And all of this
was taking place against a background where an
effort was being made to decide whether or not we
could
with the Russians or that the notion of they talk
had just started and we thought that the best way to
bring that into reality was to see what it really
meant to the Russians and our thesis was well let's
test it out on Berlin Berlin is a good test case or
the most important case if they want they talk so
let's see if we can negotiate there so that
everybody was following this thesis It wasn't
just the French. And I would not recall, I don't
think that just spelling the Soviet spy had any
effect on the British. I think we were all
following the same line, which was what people now
call their tongue. Your second question? About
Egon Barth.
back to the question of Shade's attitude. I think
some people felt that Barr was perhaps a little bit
farther to the left than the people he was dealing
with. And in a case like that,
of internal
subjective evaluations of people and events that
mean that in dealing with Barr, you would be rather
skeptical, hesitant, and so forth. He was the
political advisor, you might say, or the
intellectual advisor.
so I wouldn't say that the reservations took the
form of lack of trust although there was this
speculation about Barr that he was a little
a little too far to the left to be you know totally
relied on but this is just a question of judgment do
you trust somebody's judgment and you may his
judgment more or less without it being a case of
trust of the individual.
Is that clear, Adam? Mm-hmm. Are you saying, um, I
brought him up under early negotiating
with the, uh,
I don't
remember to tell you the truth. I can't remember
what the... It may have been. I would guess
probably it's along this line. I think it was a
step. We were trying to demonstrate good faith.
this was something that we came up with as a
demonstration of goodwill, of good faith, of
being ready to get on with it, and so forth. And I
can't remember... I think that for some reason the
Soviets must have wanted this to take place, and we
agreed to do this as a concession. But I can't
remember now the details. I think it was in that
category of... of demonstrating good faith and
demonstrating that we are serious in our intent at
this meeting to show our good faith. We have today
decided to blah, blah, blah, whatever it is.
Well, that's good, because why did these Germans
do that then?
It could have been, again, I don't remember that
occurring. See, part of the problem is that time
passes, and unless you continue to review the
material why these items get away from you, I would
guess that that's probably what it was. Unless
something else had happened, the way that they
demonstrated the fact that they had us around the
throat was by doing these things, increasing the
tolls and so forth. It seems like it would have been
a bad time for them to do it. They should have been
showing some signs
No,
I wouldn't describe anything that occurred
during that time as a sellout. I'm going to take the
right wing of the journalist term.
of the chancellor
as his political advisor and also as a negotiator
in a sense. Frequently, you will find a president
or a chancellor, someone
giving up a lot here. What he was doing was
indicating that at this point, Bonn, the federal
public, was ready and willing to negotiate an
agreement which would recognize and establish
some legitimacy to the government in East
Germany.
Yeah, I didn't understand
that,
signed by the Russians.
Again,
I don't remember that incident.
What did they say? Do you remember what the front
letter said? What did they say? What did they do?
They didn't say. They just said that, you know, I
was just wondering mainly why, how you could
negotiate something and then not ever have to sign
it. The reason is that
If you only were willing to operate on the basis of
agreeing to something on the basis of a written
piece of paper, you would be very restricted in
what you could accomplish. So at a certain point,
politicians have to decide whether they're
willing to accept something less than a written
piece of paper
is the deal you've got acceptable to the other
side? Are they willing to tolerate it and abide by
it? And if so, why, presumably, the deal will work.
So it would have been something that
and how the Russians felt about it, they probably
said okay or just shook their head or said, well, we
won't send it back to you or so forth. But they
indicated they would accept that approach. So
this is just a technique which they used in that
circumstance.
written down, translated very carefully, and all
the texts gone over carefully, and all the work.
But this may have been one of those cases where in a
preliminary negotiation, he felt this was
desirable.
They were essential. They were basic. They were
it. As I said before,
the notion was, can there be such a thing as
Daytona? And we, at that time, felt we should move
in the direction of Daytona. Brant had taken the
lead, and we were responsive to it. in Europe has
rocked on for too many years. We've not had any
breakthrough. We haven't had any development.
Again, I just have to tell you, frankly, that I
don't remember the state of play in where the
European Security Conference... Was that the one
that met in Geneva? I
think, again, I can't quite remember. I did not go
to that thing. And I think I did write a few items
that were... used there. I'm sure I wrote some
speeches or wrote some
that any particular conference was important in
influencing their decision to reach a
settlement. Because that act in and of itself, the
settlement, was important to them. It was very
clear, very understandable, and they didn't need
to go to a European security conference to
influence their decision.
Yeah, I think they were doing a music security
conference on what they called the Russian heat
movement. They were trying to pick up a different,
you know, that...
They're playing that same card right now, all
these demonstrations in Europe, to the extent
that they have Soviet encouragement or support.
The assumption is that a lot of people who
participate in these
of the people, some of the encouragement and so
forth, does have Soviet encouragement at least.
So, but even so, I don't think that that's a major, I
don't think the Soviets think that's going to
determine the course of our affairs immediately
or not. I don't think so.
It seems it would no longer serve as an obstacle.
Well, again,
how important it was is very hard to say, because
you're asking for a quantification, which
frequently is not possible. At that stage, all
other signs were negative, and this was suddenly a
positive one. You might say it was very important.
Usually, it's a case of building up. Things don't
usually happen that there's a direct turnaround.
So we probably would have been getting
indications.
this meeting could have been just, you know,
another encounter where, among other subjects,
they discussed this and they confirmed, yeah, we
think it's time to try to get together and so forth.
Usually the conversations are in rather general
terms. They don't try to avoid getting very
specific at the presidential level. So I would
say...
A little bit like the comment on the European
Security Conference, part of the developments of
the time, but not anything that turned the tide, in
effect.
You say, what effect did a sniper attack at the
Soviet Memorial have on the negotiations when
they resumed?
Did it disturb you that the West Germans did not
initially link the Bonn-Warsaw Treaty with any
Berlin settlement? I don't remember. The answer
is probably not. The reason would have been that I
would guess before they did it, there would have
been certain consultations that they would have
told the three British, French, and Irish.
If they didn't do it, I would guess there would have
been consultation, some sort of thing they should
have consulted about. If for any reason they
didn't do it, they had some explanation which was
considered acceptable. And we have not tried
to...
They're grown men. They know what the facts of life
are.
Yeah, they were saying in the book that somebody
was upset in the State Department because they
were just negotiating without more power. Yeah,
that gets a little dicey because the problem there
could be if they, for their own reasons, made some
arrangement or entered into an agreement,
We are the power that is ultimately responsible in
West Berlin, and we would have wanted to be sure
that any discussions or any actions taken would
have been consistent with all sorts of things of
importance to us, not compromise our legal
position,
not make us appear to be something that we didn't
want to appear to be. And so forth. So we certainly
would not, I think, have wanted to just turn them
loose without them.